Sourced from http://practicalcryptography.com/ciphers/   in  5/11/2025


--------------- Atbash ---------------

Atbash is a very simplistic cipher where you change A to Z, B to Y, and so on
The Atbash cipher is a very common and simple cipher that simply encodes a message with the reverse of the alphabet.
Initially it was used with Hebrew. Basically, when encoded, an "A" becomes a "Z", "B" turns into "Y", etc.

--------------- ROT13 ---------------

The ROT13 cipher is a substitution cipher with a specific key where the letters of the alphabet are offset 13 places.
I.e. all 'A's are replaced with 'N's, all 'B's are replaced with 'O's, and so on. It can also be thought of as a Caesar cipher with a shift of 13.
The ROT13 cipher offers almost no security, and can be broken very easily.
Even if an adversary doesn't know a piece of ciphertext has been enciphered with the ROT13 cipher, they can still break it by assuming it is a substitution cipher and determining the key using hill-climbing.
The ROT13 cipher is also an Caesar cipher with a key of 13, so breaking it as a Caesar cipher also works.

--------------- Caeser ---------------

The Caesar cipher is one of the earliest known and simplest ciphers.
It is a type of substitution cipher in which each letter in the plaintext is 'shifted' a certain number of places down the alphabet.
For example, with a shift of 1, A would be replaced by B, B would become C, and so on.
The method is named after Julius Caesar, who apparently used it to communicate with his generals.
More complex encryption schemes such as the Vigenère cipher employ the Caesar cipher as one element of the encryption process.
The widely known ROT13 'encryption' is simply a Caesar cipher with an offset of 13.
The Caesar cipher offers essentially no communication security, and it will be shown that it can be easily broken even by hand.
Cryptanalysis is the art of breaking codes and ciphers.
The Caesar cipher is probably the easiest of all ciphers to break.
Since the shift has to be a number between 1 and 25, (0 or 26 would result in an unchanged plaintext) we can simply try each possibility and see which one results in a piece of readable text.
If you happen to know what a piece of the ciphertext is, or you can guess a piece, then this will allow you to immediately find the key.
If this is not possible, a more systematic approach is to calculate the frequency distribution of the letters in the cipher text.
This consists of counting how many times each letter appears. Natural English text has a very distinct distribution that can be used help crack codes.

--------------- Affine ---------------

The Affine cipher is a special case of the more general monoalphabetic substitution cipher.
The cipher is less secure than a substitution cipher as it is vulnerable to all of the attacks that work against substitution ciphers, in addition to other attacks.
The cipher's primary weakness comes from the fact that if the cryptanalyst can discover (by means of frequency analysis, brute force, guessing or otherwise) the plaintext of two ciphertext characters,
then the key can be obtained by solving a simultaneous equation [1].

